PROPOSITION 64 The AIDSInitiativein California Preparedby: Senate OfficeofResearch Elisabeth Kersten,Director September 1986 207-S pgNbr=1 PROPOSITION 64: The AIDS Initiative inCalifornia Prepared by the Senate Officeof Research Kathryn Duke, J.D., M.P.H. September 1986 pgNbr=2 About thtngs on which the public thinks long it commonly attains to think right. Samuel Johnson, Lives of the Poets, 1778 kJe are not used to thinking ofillness aspolitical. Even when we recognize thepolitical dimension to health care and research -- for example^ the fact that prevention of lead poisoning or curing sickle-cell anemia is less glam¬ orous and less well financed than heart transplants --it isstill difficult to conceive of diseaseitself as a political construct. Dennis Altman, AIDS In The Mind Of America, 1986 pgNbr=3 TABLE OF CONTENTS Page I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1 II. INTRODUCTION 3 III. TEXT OF THE AIDS INITIATIVE 4 IV. BASIC INFORMATION ABOUT AIDS 5 A. AIDS and the AIDS Virus 5 B. Seropositivity, ARC, and AIDS 5 C. AIDS Transmission 5 D. Increasing Numberof AIDS Cases and Deaths.. 6 E. Estimates of Future AIDS Cases and Deaths... 6 F. AIDS Risk Groups 7 G. California Spending on AIDS 9 V. PROPOSITION 64: THE PANIC INITIATIVE 10 A. The AIDS War Plan 10 B. Historyof Proposition 64 Ballot Arguments.. 12 VI. WHAT DOES PROPOSITION 64 MEAN? QUESTIONS OF INTERPRETATION 14 A. Overview 14 B. Amending anInitiative 15 C. PANIC'S Intent 16 D. MandatedActivities vs. DiscretionaryActivities 17 E. Effectof Section 1(B) of theInitiative.... 18 F. HTLV-III "Carriers" 19 G. Reporting Requirements 21 H. Effectof "Communicable" Language 23 I. Quarantine 24 J. Conclusion 26 VII. FISCAL IMPACT 27 A. Legislative Analyst's Report 27 B. U.C. Berkeley Study 27 VIII. MEDICAL/PUBLIC HEALTH EFFECTS 30 A. Opposition from the Medical and Public Health Community 30 B. Effects on Existing AIDS Prevention and Treatment Efforts 31 C. Threat to the Blood Supply 32 IX. CONCLUSION 34 ATTACHMENTS pgNbr=4 THE AIDS INITIATIVE IN CALIFORNIA I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Prevent AIDS Now Initiative Committee (PANIC), working closely with Lyndon LaRouche's national organization, has placed on the Novemberballot a short, seemingly simpleinitiative mea¬ sure whose stated purpose is toprotect peoplewith Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and protect the public health. Although no one couldcriticize such a purpose, PANIC'S initia¬ tive uses ambiguous, unclear language that can be interpreted in strikinglydifferent ways, withwidely varying effects onpublic health AIDS preventionefforts. If the Initiative is approved by thevoters, we can expect intense and lengthylitigation over the many legal questions raised byits confusing language. But no matter howit isulti¬ mately interpreted by the courts, the medical andpublic health community are deeplyworried about theInitiative's impact on their current AIDS prevention and treatmentefforts. They fear that theInitiativewilldivert time and resources from important AIDS prevention and research work already under way, andwill subject local public healthofficers topolitical pressure that prevents them from followingtheir best professional judgment and goodpublic healthpractice. For these reasons, California's major medical andpublic health organizations are strongly opposed to PANIC'S AIDSInitiative. There are no known medical or public health organizations, and no AIDS expertswith recog¬ nized medical credentials, who support this Initiative. While health experts fear the impact of PANIC'SInitiative on current AIDS programs, economists and financial analysts are trying to decide whichof several legal interpretations might be given to theInitiative, and how much money eachof these might cost the public. If theInitiative is interpreted to have only limited impact onCalifornia's current health law andpractice. / pgNbr=5 the fiscal impact would be minimal. If, on the other hand, the Initiative is givenits most far-reaching interpretation, there would be substantial implementation costs to thepublic. Is Proposition 64 worth the lengthylitigation andpotentially enormous public costs thatwill follow from it? TheInitiative's proponents express concern about the devastating impactof AIDS, and claimtheir measure is essential to aneffective AIDS preven¬ tion program inCalifornia. At the same time, California's medi¬ cal and public health community, drawing ontheir experience with AIDS and other life-threatening diseases, fearthatthis Initia¬ tivewill only add to the AIDS problem andwill not prevent a single case of AIDS or HTLV-III infection. If the public believes in PANIC'S approach and in the AIDS pro¬ gram advocated by Lyndon LaRouche's national organization. Propo¬ sition 64will be voted into law and no doubtinitiate a wave of similarefforts throughout the nation. If, however, the public takes to heart the statementsof recognized AIDS experts and the concerns of the medical and public health community. Proposition 64will be soundly rejected by the voters. -2- pgNbr=6 II. INTRODUCTION Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a serious, fright¬ ening disease that has already brought great changes to medical budgets and public health policy inthis State and many other parts of the world. Our response to AIDS reveals a great deal about our personal and publicpriorities in health policy, public spending, personalliberties, and individual values. This November, California voters have before them anInitiative measure with significant symbolic and perhaps substantive impact on public health policy inCalifornia. Proposition 64, the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) Initiative, is a one- page measure whose provisions are being interpreted inwidely varying ways. Some analysts say thatthis measure couldresult in mandatory, periodic testingof theentire state population, resulting in layoffs and quarantine of tens and perhaps hundreds of thousands of adults and children. At the same time, other analysts insist that the measure would have no realeffect on existing law and current public health AIDS preventionactivi¬ ties . In spite of widespread confusion over thepotential impact of Proposition 64, there are two points that seemclear. First, passage of the measure would lead to many lawyers andpublic healthofficials spending time inlitigation, seekingjudicial interpretation of the many uncertain but important public health implications thatliewithin the measure's seemingly simple wording.^ Secondly, the fact that Proposition 64 addresses the subjectof preventing the disease most feared by Californians^ and, by implication, the subjects of drug abuse and sexual inter¬ course, ensures extensive media coverage ofthis measure aswell as highly emotional public discussion. -3- pgNbr=7 III. TEXT OF THE AIDS INITIATIVE SECTION 1. The purposeofthis Act isto: A. Enforce and confirm the declarationof theCalifornia Legislature set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 195that acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is serious andlife threatening to men and women fromall segmentsofsociety, that AIDS is usuallylethal andthatitis caused by an infectious agentwith a high concentrationof cases in California; B. Protect victimsof acquired immunedeficiency syndrome (AIDS), membersoftheir families andlocal communities, and the publichealthat large; and C. Utilize the existingstructureof the State Departmentof Health Services andlocal healthofficers and the statutes and regulations under which they serveto preserve thepublichealth from acquired immunedeficiency syndrome (AIDS). SECTION 2, Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is an infectious, contagious and communicable disease and the condition of being acarrierof the HTLV-IIIvirus is an infectious, conta¬ gious and communicable condition and both shall be placed and maintained by thedirectorofthe DepartmentofHealth Services on thelistof reportable diseases andconditions mandated by Health and Safety Code Section 3123, and both shall be included within the provisionsofDivision 4of such code and the rules and regulations setforth inAdministrative CodeTitle 17, Part 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 1, andall personnelof the Department ofHealth Services andall healthofficers shallfulfillallof theduties and obligations specified in each andallof the sec¬ tionsof said statutorydivision andadministrative code subchap¬ terin a manner consistentwith the intentofthis Act, as shall allother persons identified in saidprovisions. SECTION 3. In the eventthat any section, subsectionorportion thereofofthis Actis deemedunconstitutional by a propercourt of law, thenthat section, subsectionorportionthereofshall be 3t:ricken fromtheAct andall other sections, subsections and portionsthereofshall remain in force, alterable only by the people, accordingto process. -4- pgNbr=8 IV. BASIC INFORMATION ABOUT AIDS aids and the AIDS Virus. Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a viral infection that destroys the body's immune sys¬ tem, leavingit vulnerable to diseases that would normally not be a problem for an immunologically healthy person. Thevirus that causes AIDS has been called many names, the most common of which are HTLV-III or LAV. A committee of international experts has recommended that the virus be named Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), andthis term is used by a growing number of healthoffi¬ cers and physicians who workwith AIDS. However, to avoid confu¬ sion, this analysiswill use the same nomenclature as Proposition 64 does: HTLV-III. B. Seropositivity, ARC, and AIDS. A person infectedwith HTLV- III does not necessarily have AIDS or any other medical symptoms. These people are often referred to as "seropositive" because they will have positive results whentheir blood serum is tested for HTLV-III antibodies. Scientific studies of infected individuals indicate that 20%-40%of themwill develop AIDS in five to seven years. Conversely, 70% of seropositive people do not have any other AIDS symptoms. In between these two ends of the spectrum are individuals with a range of health problems — fever, fatigue, weight loss, diarrhea, and enlargement of the lymph glands — often referred to as AIDS-Related Complex (ARC). C. AIDS Transmission. HTLV-III is not transmitted in the same way as the common viruses that we are more familiarwithlike the cold orfluviruses. The overwhelming consensus of the scientific and medical community is that HTLV-III is spread by exchange of body fluids through sexual contact, receiving in¬ fected blood or blood products, sharing needles or equipment when usingillegal drugs, or from an infected mother to her infant prior to or duringdelivery. People wholive, work, or eat in -5- pgNbr=9 close but non-sexual, non-needlesharing contactwith HTLV-III- infected people are not in dangerof being infected. D. Increasing Number of AIDS Cases and Deaths. The number of AIDS cases has increased dramatically since AIDS wasfirst reported in the medical literature in 1981. In March 1983, Cali¬ fornia became one of thefirst states to make AIDS a mandatorily 3 reportable condition. At the endof July 1986, California had reported a cumulativetotal of 5,444 AIDS cases. Of these cases, slightly less thanhalfof those people have died. For that portionof the cases reported more than two years ago, there is a much higherfatality rate of roughly 2/3-3/4 of the cases. California AIDS cases have consistently represented about 20-25% ofall AIDS cases in the United States. For example, for the past twelve months (reporting period July 28, 1985 - July 28, 1986), California had 2,608 AIDS cases (23.5%) of the nationwide total of 11,113. For the cumulativetotal ofall AIDS cases reported from June 1981 to July 28, 1986, California had 5,350 cases (23.1%) of thetotal of 23,115. Although no one knows what the rate of new AIDS caseswill be,it is clear that we can expect a growing number of AIDS patients and AIDS-related deathsuntil aneffective vaccine or treatment method is developed. Scientists cautionthis could take several years, and that we must concentrate onpublic health preventive measuresuntil that time. E. Estimates of Future AIDS Cases and Deaths. Anyprojectionof the future numberof AIDS cases must be pieced together based on a number of assumptions. These assumptions include estimates of the numberof infections that have already taken place, the num¬ ber of cases thatwill develop as a result of those past infec¬ tions, the numberof new infections thatwill take place in the -6- pgNbr=10 future, and the numberof cases thatwill develop from these new infections. This means that even ifall exposure to HTLV-III were eliminated tomorrow, there wouldstill be more AIDS cases — no one knows how many — developing in the future. Withthis in mind, we note that the California Departmentof Health Services has estimated that approximately 300,000-500,000 Californians are currently infectedwith the AIDSvirus (seropos¬ itive) . By way of comparison, the U.S. Centers for Disease Con¬ trol has estimated there are currently 1-1.5million seropositive people in the United States. If we assume that 20% of those peoplewill have AIDSwithin five years, we canproject 250,000 AIDS cases in the U.S. by 1991, with 80,000 of those cases in California. F. AIDS Risk Groups. All but a small proportionof AIDS cases reported inthis country have been traced to people whofall into one of the designated "highrisk" groups and are therefore assumed to have engaged in AIDShigh-riskactivities. The risk groups/activities are: homosexual or bisexual man, intravenous (IV) drug abuser, hemophiliac, recipient of a blood transfusion, heterosexual contactwith an infected person, parentwith AIDS or in a high-risk group. For those seropositive people or AIDS patients who refuse to be interviewed by healthofficials or who say they do not belong in anyof these risk groups, medical cus¬ tomdictates that they be classified in the None Apparent/ Unknown/Other category. -7- pgNbr=11 TABLE 1 Distributionof AIDS Cases inCalifornia Total % of Cases Total Homosexual/Bisexual Male 91.5 4,979 Intravenous 120 (IV) Drug User 2.2 Heterosexual Contact 37 0.7 155 2.9 Hemophiliac or Transfusion Parent at Risk 9 0.2 None 144 2.7 Apparent/Unknown 5,444 100.2% ^Resultof roundingerrors. Source; California Departmentof Health Services, Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) MonthlyFieldActivities Report, January 1981 - July 31, 1986. TABLE 2 Distributionof AIDS Cases in the Dnited States (includingCalifornia Total % of Cases Total Homosexual/Bisexual Male^ 16,,762 72,,5 Intravenous 16,,8 (IV) Drug User 3,,889 2 Heterosexual Contact 862 3,.7 632 Hemophiliac or Transfusion 2,,7 Parent at Risk 254 1,, 1 None 716 a Apparent/Unknown 3_. ,115 ,9%' 23, 99. This includes 1,823 cases whichfall into both the Homosexual Male and IV Drug User categories. California assigns such cases to the "Homosexual Male" category, so these categories are com¬ bined here for purposes of comparison. 2 Includes 379 persons who have had heterosexual contactwith a personwith AIDS or atrisk for AIDS, and 483 personswithout other identified risks who were born in countries in which heterosexual transmission is believedto play a majorrole although precise means of transmission have not yet beenfully determined. ^Result of roundingerrors. Source: Centers for Disease Control, Center for Infectious Diseases, AIDS Program, Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) Weekly Surveillance Report, July 28, 1986. -8- pgNbr=12 Table 1 shows the distributionof AIDS cases inCalifornia by risk group/risk activity, and Table 2 for the entire United States. The main difference between these twodistributions is the higher proportion of IV drug abusers in the U.S. figures. Until now, the spread of AIDS among drug abusers has been more of a problem on the East Coast than in California, althoughthat situation is unfortunately changing now inCalifornia, which is seeing an increased proportionof AIDS in IV drug abusers at the same time that the proportionof cases among homosexual men is decreasing due to AIDS prevention education and counseling activ¬ ities . G. California Spending on AIDS. Since 1983, state support for activities aimed at controlling the spread of AIDS has dramati¬ cally increased. The Department of Health Services has created an Office of AIDS to give more attention to AIDSefforts and coordinate existing programs, and the Department's AIDS budget has gone from $500,000 to more than $13.5million, a twenty- seven-fold increase. At the same time, the Universityof Cali¬ fornia's budget for AIDS research has more than tripled to a total of $9.6million in the 1986-87 fiscal year. Althoughtotal FY 1986-87 spending on AIDS byall state depart¬ ments (including Health and Corrections)will be an impressive $19.2million, this is nevertheless far short of the $49million budget proposed by the Legislature. The California Senate and Assemblywill continue to workwith the Governor to increase funding for an "all-outeffort to prevent the further spread" of AIDS, including funds targeted for IV drug programs, education, and mental health. -9- pgNbr=13 V. PROPOSITION 64: PANIC AND LAROUCHE A. The AIDS War Plan. The proponents of Proposition 64 are the Prevent AIDS Now Initiative Committee (PANIC), an organization whose members have close tieswith the Lyndon LaRouche organiza¬ tion thatcallsitself the National Democratic Policy Committee (no connectionwith the Democratic Party). Mr. LaRouche's Policy Committee has devoted considerable attention and resources to the . . . 4 AIDS Initiative, and theInitiative proponents have referenced a LaRouche organizationpublication. Executive Intelligence Review (EIR), as backgroundmaterial fortheirInitiative. Recent statements in EIR indicate that the Initiative is a centerpiece of Mr. LaRouche's broader political agenda: At the centerof the debate in Europe, as in the United States, is theballot initiative in the state of California—Proposition 64.... Accord¬ ing to ^ Monde's August 7 article, Lyndon LaRouche, the originatorof theCalifornia ini¬ tiative, "is on the verge ofactually reaching the rank of a political star." 5 In Mr. LaRouche's EIR article, "A programto stop the AIDS pandemic," he refers specifically to theCaliforniaballot prop¬ osition on AIDS, tyingit into larger issues of international monetarypolicy, neo-Nazi groups, twentieth-century fascism and bolshevism, the "neo-Malthusian" movement centered around the Club of Rome, and the Clubof Rome's interfacewith the Soviet KGB. He states, "My knowledge about AlDS is based on the work of a special scientific task-force, which has been working for about a year, reviewing the facts with leading medical specialists around theworld." The task force referred to here is the Executive Intelligence Review (EIR) Biological Holocaust Task Force, described in EIR as -10- pgNbr=14 having been formed at theinitiative of Mr. LaRouche. On Febru¬ ary 15, 1986, the Task Force published an EIR Special Report presenting "An Emergency War Plan to Fight AIDS and Other Pandemics." According to Warren Hamerman, Directorof the EIR Biological Holocaust Task Force: We are at a uniquehistoric moment. The combinationof the PANICInitiative in California, the acknowledgement of the general threat to "non-risk" populations, the Supreme Court decision against sodomy, and a growing movement in Ibero-America against the IMF [International Monetary Fund] have created an opening for concerted action. ^ The Task Force's 140-page War Plan concentrates on these twelve points: 1) Declaration of warmobilization 2) Universal screening 3) An Apollo Moon-shot-scale crash biomedical research program 4) Full state-of-the-art medical treatment forall confirmed cases 5) Universal "classic" public-health measures, including quarantine 6) Anall-out war on drugs 7) A Biological Strategic DefenseInitiative (BSDI) utilizing the most modern laser and other optical-biophysics technologies for defense of the health of theworld's populations 8) Upgradingof thenutritional intake of theworld's popula¬ tions to enhance immune function 9) Worldwide mosquito, insect, and vermin control 10) Emergency upgrading of sanitation, housing, and water systems 11) Activation of the National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) 12) U.S. withdrawal from the Soviet-dominated World Health Organization (WHO). The statements by Mr. LaRouche about his California AIDS Initia¬ tive, taken togetherwith the War Plan proposals, give Proposi¬ tion 64 a prominent role in the LaRouche organization's larger political goals. Having placed Proposition 64withinthis larger context, the restofthis reportwill concentrate on thetext and -11- pgNbr=15 interpretation ofthat Proposition without further reference to its potential significancewithin the LaRouche organization. B. History of the Proposition 64 Ballot Arguments. Theballot pamphlet arguments andrebuttals that are being published by the State (see Appendix A) are the resultof an unprecedented lawsuit by the Secretary of State toclarify the state's responsibility to avoid publishing "false" or "misleading" statements in the ballot pamphlet. After receiving the text of theInitiative proponents' Rebuttal to the Argument Against Proposition 64, the Secretaryfiled suit to remove statements alleged to be false and misleading. The California Medical Association and the Cali¬ fornia Nurses Associationlater joined the Secretary in O officially objecting to these statements. The three statements in question were: "AIDS is not 'hard to get';it is easy to get;" "Potential insect and respiratory 9 transmission has been established by numerous studies;" and "Transmission by 'casual contact' iswell established." The Initiative proponents had already agreed thatthis last statement concerning casual contact was incorrect, and sought to amend their originaltextwiththis statement, "There is no evidence for the assertionthat AIDS cannot be transmitted by casual con¬ tact." In addition to deciding whether or not these statements were false or misleading, the court was also asked by theInitiative proponents to restore the name of Dr. Ken Kizer totheirrebuttal argument. Dr. Kizer, Directorof theCalifornia Department of Health Services, had previouslywritten to the Secretaryof State, objecting to the useofhis name without permission in the proponents' rebuttalargument.The Secretary had complied with Dr. Kizer's demand, so theInitiative proponents sued to restore the deleted sentence containing Dr. Kizer's name. -12- pgNbr=16 After hearing the legal arguments, Sacramento Superior Court Judge James T. Ford orderedall three statements regarding AIDS transmission removed from theballot pamphlet arguments because they were "false" or "misleading," even when the "clear and con¬ vincing" standard ofproof (a higher standard ofproof than is usually used incivil suits) was applied. He also ordered that the statement using Dr. Kizer's name be restored to thetext, ruling thatthisparticular use ofKizer's name was linked only to acall for "more reporting and testing" and did not carry the assertion or implication that Dr. Kizer supports theInitiative, which in fact he has publicly opposed. -13- pgNbr=17 VI. WHAT DOES PROPOSITION 64 MEAN? QUESTIONS OF INTERPRETATION A. Overview. The Initiative's ambiguous wording creates several important problemsoflegal interpretation, each one subjectto extensive litigation. The remainderofthis report discusses the legal, fiscal, and medical/public healtheffects of Proposition 64 being approved by the voters and upheld by the courts. Thedifficulty in such a discussion is that arealistic forecastof the medical/public healtheffects and fiscal effects depends on knowing what the legaleffectof theInitiative's passage would be, but that ques¬ tion is precisely the one that has no clear answer. Neverthe¬ less, one cantalk in general terms about a range of possible effects, with the understandingthatthis range extends so far as to include, at the one end, verylittle substantive effect, and at the other end, a massive change inexistingpublic health programs, relocationof thousands of people, and a major redis¬ tribution of public expenditures on health, welfare, and educa¬ tion. This reportwill touch on eight general questions of Proposi¬ tion 64's legal interpretation andeffect. • Amending an initiative-generated law. • Interpreting theInitiative's intent. • The effectof "enforc[ing] and confirm[ing]" existing law and requiringpublic healthofficials to"fulfillall of the[ir] duties andobligations" regarding specifiedpublic health laws. • Theeffectof language in theInitiative stating as its purpose the protectionof "AIDS victims" and the general public health. e Thedefinitionof an HTLV-III "carrier." • Reporting duties under theInitiative. • The effect of declaring people who have AIDS or are a "car¬ rier" to be "infectious, contagious and communicable." • Mandationof widespreadtesting and quarantine. -14- pgNbr=18 It is safe to assume that eachof these questionswill be vigor¬ ously and extensivelylitigated, with an unknowneffect on AIDS public healthpolicy during the months and, more probably, years thatitwill take for the courts to resolve these questions. B. Amending aninitiative. An initiative-made lawis harderto amend than most other laws. Many people do not realize that a lawresulting fromvoter approval of aninitiative isdifferent from a law coming out of the usual legislative process. One important difference is the fact that an initiative-made law cannot be amended in the usual way (unless the textof the initiative specifically allowsthis), but must instead be amended by anotherinitiative.Thepracti¬ cal implication ofthis difference is that the public should expect an extra amountof care and thought to go intodrafting an initiative because of the practical and financial demands of going back before the votersif any changes, however minor, are needed to clarify or improve that law. The remainderof the Legal Interpretation sectionofthis report will examine issues raised by Section 1 and Section 2 of the AIDS Initiative. Section 3 needs no discussion, asit is a routine "severability" clause that becomes operative onlyif part of the Initiative is ruledunconstitutional. Ifthis happens. Section 3 prevents the restof theInitiative from automatically becoming invalid by requiring that the constitutionalityof each legal issue in theInitiative be litigated separately. -15- pgNbr=19 c. panic's Intent. Legal interpretationof the "statutory intent"of the AIDS Initiative; Whatwill be considered and how much weightwill the courts giveit? If there is a question about the meaningof a law, a judge or attorneywill often look to the "statutory intent" for guidance 12 in interpretation. If the statute is the resultof the legis¬ lative process, the judge can look to theofficial recordof the legislative author's prior statements on the purposeof the law, and can often look at transcripts of public hearings in which the purpose of the then-proposed law was discussed and recorded. If, however, the statute in question results from theinitiative process, there is nowritten legislative history to consult, and the judge must rely on other sources to determine the initia¬ tive's "statutory intent." One would expect an easy jobof determining the AIDSInitiative's "statutory intent" becauseall of Section 1 is a statementofits purpose. Unfortunately, this Section uses broad and ambiguous phrases that add more confusion thanclarification to the ques¬ tionof intent. Someof the questions raised by theInitiative's "purpose" lan¬ guage are discussed in Subsection E below. Other questions include: What doesit mean to "enforce and confirm" a declara¬ tion about AIDS? Does the enforcement language change existing law in any way? What purpose is served by stating an intention to"utilize the existing structure" of state and local health officers and the laws "under which they serve"? If no change in existing public health structure and laws is intended, what is the purpose of the initiative? If there is an intention to remove fromhealthofficers' discretion what is currentlyleft to their best medical judgment, why not statethis clearly and directly? -16- pgNbr=20 In addition to looking at theInitiative's statementof purpose, a courtwill probably look at the accompanyingballot pamphlet arguments toclarify statutory intent. (See Appendix A for the text of these arguments.) These arguments carry no weightif they imply a resultdifferent from the meaningof the statutory language (as interpreted by the court), but courtswill sometimes turn toballot argumentsiftheir text can shedlight on statutes that are otherwise unclear. This is one reason that the Secre¬ tary of State, theCalifornia Medical Association, and the Cali¬ fornia Nurses' Association sued to remove false and misleading statements from theInitiative proponents' ballot arguments. (See Section V(B) ofthis report fordetails ofthis.) One final interpretive question unique tothisInitiative involves the acronym chosen by theInitiative proponents: PANIC. "Panic" means "a sudden, unreasoning, hysterical fear, often 13 spreadingquickly". Courtswill sometimes include intheir legal opinions a considerationof whether or not a certain out¬ come is "against publicpolicy" and therefore to be avoided. If a court found the promotion ofpublic panic to be against public policy, how wouldthis influenceits consideration of the AIDS Initiative's "intent"? D. MandatedActivities vs. DiscretionaryActivities. Does the Initiative allowhealthofficials to continue usingtheirbest medical judgment inexercisingtheirprofessional powers, or does it take awaythisflexibility by mandatingactivitiesthat are discretionary underexisting law? Acentral question in the interpretation of both Section 1 and Section 2 is the extent to which state and local public health officials would no longer be allowed to usetheir professional judgment in carrying outtheir duties. Several phrases in the Initiative implythis intentwithout speakingdirectly to the -17- pgNbr=21 actions that would be mandated. For example, in Section 1 of the Initiative, the words "enforce" at the beginningof Part A and"utilize" at the beginning of Part C could be seen as a man¬ date for some unspecified action, arguably a mandationofactivi¬ ties that are currently discretionary. Similarly, the language in Section 2 that"all personnelof the Departmentof Health Services andall health officers shallfulfillall of the duties and obligations specified in each andall of the sections of [H&S §3123 and C.A.C. Title 17, Part 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 1]" could be interpreted as taking away frompublic healthofficials all discretion in carrying out theactivities referred to in the referenced laws.^^ Alternatively, a more limited legal interpretationof these phrases would allowpublic healthofficials to continue using their discretionary powers according totheir best professional judgment abouteffective AIDS prevention measures. This is not to saythat thepractical effect of theInitiative's passage might not be more far-reaching as a resultof ensuingpolitical pressure on local healthofficials to respond to the expressed "politicalwill," butthat is adifferent issue. E. Effectof Section 1 (B) of theInitiative. What is the effectofInitiative language stating as theInitiative's purpose protectionofpeoplewith AIDS and the generalpublic health? Section 1(B) declaresit to bepartof theInitiative's purpose to: Protectvictims of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), membersoftheir families and local communities, and the public health at large[.] Similarly, the last partof Section 1(C) declares thatit is the Initiative's purpose to have healthofficialsutilize existing laws "to preserve the public health from AIDS." -18- pgNbr=22 The interaction ofthis Subsectionwith the "mandatory vs. dis¬ cretionary powers" issue presented above leads to some interest¬ ing questions. If theInitiative were givenits more far-reaching legal interpretation (for example, changes in health officials' discretionary powers regardingtesting and quarantine, and changes in confidentiality safeguards), andif some — orall — health officials determined that the actions required by this interpretation wouldprotect neither the public health in general nor people with AIDS in particular, could the healthofficials use the intent language above to supporttheir refusal to carry out the newly-mandatedactivities? Such an action would not be surprising in light of the public health and medical community's widespread conviction that implementing the more far-reaching interpretationof theInitiative would not assist AIDS prevention efforts, but would, instead, makeit moredifficult to detect and prevent the spreadof AIDS. F. HTLV-III "Carriers". Whois an "HTLV-IIIcarrier" and how wouldthis be determined? What implications doesthis have for current AIDS-preventionefforts? TheInitiative makes declarations and imposes requirements con¬ cerning both AIDS and "the condition of being acarrierof the HTLV-III virus." Although there is a clear and widely-used medical definition of who does or does not have AIDS, there is no widely available methodof determining who is carrying the virus HTLV-III. If the intent of theInitiative is to use currently-available tests to determine whether HTLV-III antibodies are present,it would have been less confusing to state that directly, while acknowledgingthat people with HTLV-III antibodies may or may not be "carriers." Any proposal for widespread use of the HTLV-Iii antibodytest (blood test) to screen for "carriers" must take -19- pgNbr=23 into account the fact that these tests are not very specific and were developed to protect the blood supply even at the expense of mistakenly discarding healthy, acceptable blood. This means that the antibody testsyield a certain rate of false positives, espe¬ cially when used on a wide-scale basis for the general popu- , . . 16 lation. Alternatively, theInitiative could be interpreted as speaking to a future development, namely, the widespread availabilityof a methodof testingdirectly for presenceof HTLV-III. Thevirus tests (tissue cultures) that are currently performed on antibody-positive individuals are able to culture thevirus only 60%of the time, which could indicatethat the numberof seropos¬ itive people in California is much larger than the number of actualvirus carriers. Unfortunately, the virus test is time- consiaming, expensive (approximately $300 pertest), and somewhat experimental. Consequently,it is not widely used atthis time. Obviously, the "carrier" interpretation that is used has implica¬ tions on theInitiative's impact. Ifit is interpreted to refer to people with HTLV-III antibodies, there could be changes in the stringent confidentiality safeguards that are partofCalifor¬ nia's Alternative Test Site program. This program was estab¬ lished last year to protectCalifornia's blood supply by encouraginghigh-risk people to be confidentially tested at an "alternative" test site insteadof having to use blood donation sites to determinetheir antibody status. There are currently 53 Alternative Test Sites in operation, with approximately 40,000 people having been tested inthis program. People whovisit one of these sites receive not only a bloodtest, but also medical and behavioral counseling on reducing theriskof exposure to and transmission of the AIDSvirus. These test sites also serve as a referral point for people who need medical, public health, or support services. -20- pgNbr=24 If theInitiative were interpreted as eliminating or signifi¬ cantly relaxing the confidentiality safeguards in theAlternative Test Site program, there would be a sharp drop in the number of peoplevoluntarilyparticipating inits testing andrisk- reduction counseling services, and the program would no longer be able to operate asit currently does. Alternatively,if the Initiative's "carrier" language were interpreted to refer to people known to carry HTLV-III, there would belittle impact on the Alternate Test Site program becauseit tests for HTLV-III antibodies. No matter whatdefinition of "carrier" is eventually adopted, and no matter when atest for HTLV-III becomes widely available, the keypublic health issue here should be how HTLV-III is trans¬ mitted from a "carrier" to a non-infected person, and the most effective way of preventingthat transmission. This issue is too important to beleft to implication, andit deserves to be addressed directly inall discussions about AIDS and the AIDS Initiative. Not coincidentally, this is the issue on which PANIC and LaRouche disagree most dramaticallywith prevailing medical and public health opinion. G. Reporting Requirements. Whateffectwill theInitiative have on hospitals' andhealthofficials' dutyto report AIDS cases? How mightitaffect theduties and actionsof membersof the public who "suspect" someone has AIDS oris a "carrier"? Proposition 64 requires that bothcarriers and AIDS cases "shall be placed and maintained...on thelist of reportable diseases and conditions mandated by Health and Safety Code Section 3123..." With respect to AIDS reporting by physicians, healthofficers, and hospitals, theInitiative would have no realeffect. To understand why requires abrief explanationof mandatory disease reporting inCalifornia. -21- pgNbr=25 There are two ways in which a disease becomes mandatorily report¬ able: being reported as anAdministrative Code Section 2503 "unusual disease," or appearing on the more permanent, 17 Section 2500listof diseases. For physicians, healthoffi¬ cers, and hospitals, there is noeffective difference between reporting a disease that appears on onelist or the other. One list contains such recently-recognized diseases as AIDS andlis¬ teriosis, and the other includes the more "traditional" concerns of public healthofficers such as leprosy, malaria, rabies, and 18 tuberculosis. With respect to making "carriers" mandatorily reportable to the State, thefirst point to bear in mind is the confusion — already discussed — over who should be treated as a "carrier" and howthat status would be established. However, evenif the "carrier" language wererestricted to those people who have posi¬ tive results on a test for HTLV-III (not justits antibodies), the reporting requirements might nevertheless apply very broadly because Section 2500 requires reporting by "every physician, practitioner,...or any other person knowingof...a case or sus¬ pected case." (Emphasis added.) Ifthis language is givenits broadest interpretation, everyday citizens could be required to report people suspected of being "HTLV-III carriers" by reasonoftheir antibodytest status, or perhaps even due to suspicions that they are engaging in AIDS high-risk behavior, such as IV drug abuse or certain kinds of sexual intercourse. Although such a far-reaching interpretation of theInitiative's reporting requirements seemsunlikely,it is not impossible, and could verywell be argued during the exten¬ sive litigation that is expectedif the'Initiative passes. Finally,it is worth remembering thatif theInitiative is even¬ tually interpreted as effectively elevating specified regulations -22- pgNbr=26 to the status of statutes, the language in these regulations would no longer be subject to the usual administrative change process, or even the usual statutory amendment process. H. Effect of "Communicable" Language. What is theeffectof declaring people who have AIDS or are an "HTLV-IIIcarrier" to be "infectious, contagious, and communicable"? The basic interpretation question here is theeffect ofTitle 17 regulations §§2526 and 2530 using mandatory language, while stat¬ utory provisions of the Health and Safety Code leave healthoffi¬ cials with more discretion. More specifically, what is the effect of regulations thatprohibit any person "with a communica¬ ble disease or suspectedof being infectedwith a communicable disease" from engaging in commercial food handling? What is the effect of regulations requiring a schoolprincipal to exclude "any child or other person affectedwith a disease presumably communicable"? Bothof these regulations allow the healthofficer to use his or her professional judgment about allowing school attendance and food handling by a personwith a "communicable" disease, but the language suggests this be done on a case-by-case basis. Presumably, local or state healthofficials would not be allowed to make a blanket declaration similar to the one made by the Centers for Disease Control prescribing the conditions under which a food handler or school child should or should not be 1 Q considered to present a public healththreat. The AIDS Initia¬ tive seems to be thefirst initiative to incorporate statutes and regulations by referring to them in theinitiative text.^® For this reason, legal analysts disagree about theeffectofthis incorporation. The following are some of the unanswered ques¬ tions posed by the incorporationof regulations. -23- pgNbr=27 What is theeffect of incorporating regulations that may be invalid by reason of exceeding the authorityof the statute to which they refer? Does the incorporationof regulations into an initiative insulate them indefinitely from the normal process of regulatory review and update, or isit impossible to achieve such a resultwith language as indirect as thisInitiative's language? If the Initiative insulates regulations fromestablished adminis¬ trative review procedures, would the regulations be subject to amendment through the legislative process, or must they be brought back before the voters for approval of suggested updates 21 and changes? Could only the regulations specifically refer¬ enced by theInitiative be elevated to the status of statutory iaw, or could other regulations also be included as a result of the reference in Section 1 of theInitiative to "the statutes and regulations under which [local healthofficers] serve to preserve the public health from AIDS"? Full discussionof these legal questions is beyond the scope ofthis report, but certain to be relevant in the litigationthat is expectedif theInitiative is approved by the voters. I. Quarantine. Does theInitiative give healthofficials new quarantine powers? What would be the impactofquarantiningall people inCalifornia who have AIDSor are "carriers"? Many state andnational news media articles have referred to Proposition 64 as a new "quarantine measure," butthis is simply not true. The Department of Health Services has always possessed the power to quarantine people "whenever inits judgment such 22 action is necessary to protect or preserve the publichealth." What theInitiative adds to existing quarantine powers is unclear. On the one hand,it may do nothing more than emphasize the state's existing, discretionary quarantine powers, but on the other hand,it may take away someofthatdiscretion by requiring -24- pgNbr=28 quarantine of "persons or animals that have been exposed to a 23 communicable disease." Of course, evenif theInitiative were interpreted to require quarantine in circumstances that are cur¬ rentlyleft to healthofficials' discretion, there remain impor¬ tant questions on defining "exposure" and determining how quarantine would be carried out. If every one of the estimated 300,000 to 500,000 seropositive Californians had to be quarantined, there would be unimaginable logistical problems. How would these people be identified — by wide-scale, mandatory testing? How would such a gigantic medical effort be accomplished so that nobody couldslip through the testing net? Evenif healthofficials carried out one mass test¬ ing, howoften would they have to do repeat testing to assure identificationof people who become seropositive at a later time? Once mass testing took place, wouldall seropositive people be brought together in one or two central locations so they could be more effectively isolated and observed? If so, would one or two cities the size of Sacramento be evacuated to make room for these new "quarantinecities," or would makeshift internment camps be built? If we assume that the AIDS virus has an incubation period of at least five years and probably a lifetime, how long would these people be quarantined? Any person who begins to think through these questions can quickly see the wrenching implications of widespread quarantine. According to Dr. Donald Francis, a Centers for Disease Control scientist and physician who has participated in medical quaran¬ tines in other countries, "Some people inthis country remember short-term quarantines fromtheir childhood for scarlet fever or measles and they don't think the idea of an AIDS quarantine is such a bad one. Unfortunately, these people don't understand how different a large-scale AIDS quarantine would be, both because of -25- pgNbr=29 the massive disruptionit would cause, and the lack ofpublic healthbenefit in preventing AIDS exposure." J. Conclusion. The drafters of theInitiative — whether by design or accident-- have used ambiguous language whose meaning is open to a number of interpretationswith widelydifferent results. If the Initiative is voted into law, the public can expect intense and lengthy litigation over the many questions raised by each of the legal questions mentioned above. -26- pgNbr=30 VII. FISCAL IMPACT A. Legislative Analyst's Report. Appendix D contains thefull textof the Legislative Analyst's five-page report on Proposi¬ tion 64's fiscal impact. Unfortunately, theInitiative's uncer¬ tain language prevents the Analyst from coming to anydefinite estimate of its financial costs. To quote from the analysis: The fiscaleffect ofthis measure could varygreatly, depend¬ ing on howit would be interpreted by state and local health officers and the courts. If existingdiscretionary communi¬ cable disease controls were applied to the AIDS disease, there would be ^substantial net change in state and local costs as a directresultofthis measure.... [However] the fiscal impact could be very substantialif the measure were interpreted to require changes in AIDS control measures by state and local health officers, either voluntarily or as a result of a change in medical knowledge on how the disease is spread, or as a result of court decisions which mandate cer¬ tain control measures. (Emphasis inoriginal.) B. U.C. Berkeley Study. A recently-released report by two Uni¬ versity ofCalifornia professors uses some assumptions about the Initiative's interpretation and legaleffect to arrive at more precise cost estimates of Proposition 64's effect onCalifornia's 25 economic output and on state and local government finances. The authors assume that advances in medical technologywill soon produce awidely-available and inexpensive test for the presence of HTLV-III, so that the estimated 300,000 Californians currently estimated to be seropositive would be considered "carriers" under theInitiative's provisions. The authors further assume thatall people in the education and food handling sectors who carry HTLV-III or have AIDS would be dismissed fromtheir jobs, either because passage of theInitiative isultimately interpreted as mandating such dismissals or because of thepolitical pressure resulting from Proposition 64's passage. -27- pgNbr=31 Using these assumptions, the economists estimate that 36,000 workers would losetheir jobs as adirect resultof the Initia¬ tive's enactment, and another 72,000 people (with no HTLV-III infection) would be laidoff due to the multipliereffectof the original dismissals. This would lead to economic costs in the first yearof $2.35billion in lost output in the State. In addition, state and local governments would experience another $628million in losses due to reduced tax revenues, unemployment insurance payments, andtesting costs. These costs would increase sharply over time, leading to a cumulativetotal in the first four years of $14billion in foregone output and $2.39 billion costs to state and local government. The economists then examine the costs of testing the entire popu¬ lation ofCalifornia and quarantining those people who are sero¬ positive. They estimate thesedirect costs to be $7.9billion in thefirst year, plus $19billion in foregone output. Finally, the report examines the consequences of mass testing in the education and food handling sectors, withparticular atten¬ tion to the estimated 22,000 falsepositive test results among the adults tested and the estimated 47,000 false positive results 26 among school children. In summary, the two UniversityofCalifornia economists conclude that passage of Proposition 64 would result in an estimated $2.3billion loss of economic output in thefirst year, and $14billion over four years. Estimated tax losses and other fiscal costs to California taxpayers would be $630million in the first year, and $2.4billion over four years. These are high costs, althoughit should be remembered that they are based not only on economic assumptions, but also assumptions about the Initiative's legaleffectthat may or may not be accepted by the courts. -28- pgNbr=32 Having made these disclaimers,it isstill worth noting thatif these cost estimates are anywhere near being accurate reflections of Proposition 64's fiscal impact, they have sobering implica¬ tions for our state and local budgets. Would these additional costs be coveredwith a tax increase, or would the Governor and Legislature be unwilling to raise taxes and instead begin to redistribute moneywithin the existing allotments forhealth, education, and other budget items? -29- pgNbr=33 VIII. MEDICAL/PUBLIC HEALTH EFFECTS A. Opposition from the Medical and Public Health Community. The attitude of the medical and public health experts toward Proposi¬ tion 64 can perhaps best be summed up in a comment made by Dr. Donald Francis, an international health expert and the U.S. Cen¬ ters for Disease Control AIDS Advisor to California. "Proposi¬ tion 64 would cripplethis state'seffort to control AIDS. The measure is an incredible waste of time, an absurdity." Dr. James Chin is another experiencedpublic healthofficial who finds Proposition 64 an "absurd" approach toward a serious public health problem. Dr. Chin, Directorof the Infectious Disease Branch and Acting Directorof the Sexually Transmitted Diseases Sectionof theCalifornia Department of Health Services, listened at a recent AIDS Task Force meeting to lawyers and economists discuss interpretive questions surrounding the AIDSInitiative. When the discussion turned to theInitiative's impact on public health. Dr. Chin expressed amazementthat rational people could seriously discussdifferent methods of implementing anInitiative whoseeffect would be "disastrous." He continued, "Ifthis Ini¬ tiative were to pass and we [healthofficials] had toredirect ourefforts to school children and food handlers, wewouldn't prevent one single AIDS case. That's whythisInitiative is absurd." Indeed, thelist of groups who have already expressedtheir for¬ mal opposition on Proposition 64 reads like a "Who's Who" of the public health sector; California Medical Association, Health Officers Associationof California, California Nurses' Associa¬ tion, California Hospital Association, California Public Health Association, Hemophilia CouncilofCalifornia, Association for Practitioners in Infection Control, California Council on Mental -30- pgNbr=34 Health, California State Psychological Association, California Psychiatric Association, Los Angeles County Medical Association, San Francisco County Medical Society, Santa Clara County Medical Society, Orange CountyPractitioners in Infection Control, and the Unionof American Physicians and Dentists. At the date of this report, there are no medical or health organizations sup¬ porting or known to be considering support for theInitiative. Why is the medical andpublic health community so united intheir concern about Proposition 64? The short answer is that these physicians and healthofficials feel that PANIC and the LaRouche organization have drafted a lawthat is aimed more at deep- seated, sometimes irrational public fear about AIDS than at an effective AIDS prevention and treatmenteffort. Some health officers have already announcedthat they wouldquit before com¬ plyingwith such a counter-productive order. "It would make our job alot harder and cause alot more people to be infected," explained Dr. Dean Echenberg, Chiefof Infection and Disease Control for San Francisco. B. Effect on existing AIDS prevention and treatmentefforts. Local healthofficials are concerned about Proposition 64 becom¬ ing law and being interpreted in a way that would seriously underminetheir existing AIDS and other public health programs. These healthofficials fear that passage of theInitiative would destroy the relationshipoftrust that healthofficers have so carefully beenbuildingwith people in high risk-groups for AIDS. At the current stage of medical knowledge, healthofficials must rely heavily on the cooperationof these people to come forward and be tested, and to changetheir behavior to reduce the risk of acquiring or transmitting the AIDSvirus. If that relationship oftrust and confidentiality is destroyed, healthofficers fear that AIDSwill be driven underground because no onewill volun- -31- pgNbr=35 tarily cooperate inhealth programs whenthatparticipation could lead to unemployment andquarantine. It would indeed be ironic if the effectof theInitiative were that those individuals who are most cooperativewith healthofficials were most penalized with economic and social sanctions. Beyond the questionof AIDS prevention programs, public health officials fear that passage of theInitiative would inevitably lead to many hours spent in court andlitigation insteadof in public healthactivities. If theInitiative became law and a public healthofficer decidedthat the limited legal interpreta¬ tion (limitedeffect on existing public healthactivities) was the correct one, thatofficial would no doubt be sued by someone with adifferent interpretation. Theresult would be that the localofficial would be involved in at least one, and possibly many lawsuits, with correspondingly diminished time fordirect public healthactivities. Conversely, a local healthofficer might interpret or be instructed to give theInitiative a more far-reaching interpretation (mass testing, underminingof exist¬ ingconfidentiality safeguards, large-scale quarantine). That official would no doubt also be sued, with the same result of increased time spent inlitigation and decreased time indirect public healthefforts. C. Threat to the blood supply. In additionto deep concerns about Proposition 64's effect onpublic health programs, physi¬ cians and blood bankofficials are worried about theInitiative's threat to our blood supply. If the Initiative is voted into law, theseofficials fearthat the generalpublic, andparticularly people who work in schools or in food handling,will be reluctant to donate blood even though they are healthy and do not engage in any AIDShigh-risk behavior. These peoplewill hearof the small but nevertheless inevitable number of false positive test results, andwill not want to expose themselves to theriskof -32- pgNbr=36 being falsely labelled a "carrier" as a result of perforining the altruistic act of blood donation. Dr. Sylvia Hoag, Chairmanof the Committee on Blood Banks, Cali¬ fornia Medical Association, putit this way. "If you were a school teacher whodidn't belong to an AIDSrisk group, and you had heard about false positive test results, would yourisk los¬ ing your job and being quarantined just so you could give blood? It doesn't take much to dissuade people fromgiving blood, and the threatof false positives couldsignificantly disrupt our whole blood supply, which would have widespread repercussions 28 throughout the medical care system." In addition, healthofficials worrythat the Proposition 64 cam¬ paignwill increase public fear about AIDSwithout educating people on what is and is not a high-riskactivity. If people knowthat AIDS is transmitted "through the blood," will they understand that there is reuse of needles at blood donation sites, and therefore noriskof "catching AIDS" as a result of donating blood? Does PANIC want to educate people about thetruly high-risk activities, or only whip up public hysteria about AIDS? These are the questions and concerns of health and blood bankoffi¬ cials . -33- pgNbr=37 IX. CONCLUSION Californians have every reason to be frightened and concerned about the recently-recognized disease known as Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The Prevent AIDS NowInitiative Committee (PANIC), working closelywith Lyndon LaRouche's national organization, has put onto the Novemberballot aniniti¬ ative proposition that addresses thepublic's deep-seated fears about AIDS in a short, seemingly simple measure that inreality isfilled with ambiguity and uncertainty. If the measure is givenits most limited interpretation,it would havelittle legal effect on current public healthpractices, but could effectively pressure local healthofficials into taking steps they feel are medically unwise but politically necessary. If the measure is givenits most far-reaching legal interpretation, there would be a majorredirectionof current medical andpublic healthactivi¬ ties, large increases inpublic spending, anddisruptionof our entire social organizationwithout any corresponding decrease in the numberof AIDS cases. Proposition 64 has already put demands on the time and resources of the medical and public health community representatives who are concerned about theeffect of PANIC'S proposal on our AIDS preventionpolicy. If Proposition 64 is passed by thevoters,it will represent a landmark rejection of the prevailing medical and public health wisdom on a diseasewith great significance for the healthofall Californians. -34- pgNbr=38 This report may be reproduced or cited by including reference to theCalifornia Senate Office of Research. It was prepared by Kathryn Duke, J.D., who takesfull responsibility forits accuracy and analysis, whilegratefully acknowledging the many people who provided assistance inits preparation, including Senate Office of Research colleagues and the following individ¬ uals who commented on anearlierdraft: Matthew Coles, J.D.; Dean Echenberg, M.D., Ph.D.; Donald Francis, M.D., D.Sc.; Anne Jennings, J.D.; Mark Madsen, M.P.H. -35- pgNbr=39 FOOTNOTES ^At least one healthofficial has referred to the AIDS Initia¬ tive as the "1986Full Employment Act for Lawyers." 2 "The AIDS Epidemic," a FieldInstitute poll published December 1985. 3 See Section VI(G) ofthis report for discussionof AIDS report¬ ing inCalifornia. 4 For example, the LaRouche organization states thatit was LaRouche supporters who gathered the approximately 700,000 signatures that put the AIDSInitiative on theballot. Executive Intelligence Review, July 18, 1986, p.36. 5 EIR, Executive Intelligence Review, August 22, 1986, p.8. g Executive Intelligence Review, July 18, 1986, pp. 32-37. at 31. 0 Election Code §3576 reads, in part: Not less than 20 days before he submits the copy for the ballot pamphlet to the State Printer, the Secretaryof State shall make such copy available for public examination. Any voter may seek awrit of mandate requiring any such copy to be amended or deleted from theballot pamphlet. A peremptory writ of mandate shall issue only upon clear and convincing proofthat the copy in question is false, misleading or inconsistentwith the requirements ofthis code or Chapter 8 (commencingwith Section 88000) ofTitle 9 of the Government Code....If the proceeding is initiated by the Secretaryof State, the State Printer shall be named as the respondent. (Emphasis added.) 9 Initiative proponents have acknowledged that the questionof insect transmission has nodirect relationshipwith thetext of Proposition 64. Instead, they sayit touches on the "larger issues" of theInitiative: the Centers for Disease Control's response to AIDS. -36- pgNbr=40 ^^See Elections Code § 3564.1. ^^Art.II, §10(c) of theCalifornia Constitution provides: The Legislature may amend or repeal referendumstatutes. It may amend or repeal anInitiative statute by another statute that becomeseffective only when approved by the electors unless theInitiative statute permits amendment or repeal withouttheir approval. 12 The phrase "legislative intent" is the more usual one, but confusing when used for a lawresulting from the initiative instead of legislative process. 1 O Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, Second College Edition, 1982. ^^These regulations discuss such topics as reportingof diseases, quarantine, exclusion from schools, public food handlers, and funerals. See Appendix C for thefull text of these statutes and regulations. ^^"HTLV-III" stands for Human T-LymphotrophicVirus, TypeIII. For that reason,it is redundant to refer to "the HTLV-III virus," andthis phrasewill be used only when quoting from the Initiative. ^^Some groups of people, such as pregnant women, are especially prone to false positives on the HTLV-III antibodytest. See Section VIII(C) ofthis report for more discussion of the prob¬ lemof false positives. 17 See California Administrative CodeTitle 17, §2500 and §2503. 18 Appendix B contains thelist of reportable diseases drawn up earlierthis year by the Disease Control and Epidemiology Com¬ mittee of theCalifornia Conference of Local Health Officers as partofits periodic reviewof the Section 2500listof report¬ able diseases. It is clear fromthis list that healthofficers consider AIDS and listeriosis, which are reportable under Sec¬ tion 2503, to be reportable in the same way as diseases listed in Section 2500. The Committee has recommended that the Departmentof Health Services make the technical changeof transferring AIDS andlisteriosis to the Section 2500list at the same time that other additions and deletions are made. 19 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control's Recommendations are as follows: Food-service workers are defined as individuals whose occupa¬ tions involve the preparation or serving of food or beverages (e.g., cooks, caterers, servers, waiters, bartenders, airline -37- pgNbr=41 attendants). All epidemiologic and laboratory evidence indi¬ cates that bloodborne and sexually transmitted infections are not transmitted during the preparation or serving of food or beverages, and no instances of HBV [Hepatitis Bvirus] or HTLV-III/LAV transmission have been documented inthis set¬ ting, . . Food-service workers known to be infectedwith HTLV/LAV need not be restricted from work unless they have evidenceof other infection or illness for which any food-service worker should also berestricted. Routine serologic testing of food-service workers for anti¬ body to HTLV-III/LAV is not recommended to prevent disease transmission from food-service workers to consumers. (Empha¬ sis added.) United States Centers for Disease Control, "Morbidity and Mor¬ tality," 1985 Nov.15; 34:681-86, 691-95. Based on current evidence, casual person-to-person contact as would occur among schoolchildren appears to pose norisk. However, studies of theriskof transmission through contact between younger children andneurologically handicapped chil¬ dren who lack controloftheir body secretions are very limited.... Mandatory screening as a condition for school entry is not warranted based on available data. (Emphasis added.) United States Centers for Disease Control, "Morbidity and Mor¬ tality Weekly Report," 1985 Aug.30; 34:517-521. 20 TheInitiative requiresall healthofficers to"fulfillall of the duties and obligations specified" in Administrative Code Title 17, Part 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 1 "in a manner consis¬ tentwith the intentofthisAct." See Appendix C for the complete text of statutes and regulations referred to by the Initiative. ^^Seefn.ll. ^^Health and Safety Code §3051. California Administrative Code, Title 17, Section 2521. ^'^Statement made at the California Departmentof Health Services AIDS Task Force Meeting, August 13, 1986. ^^Robert M. Anderson and John M. Quigley, "The Economic Impact of the Adoptionof Proposition 64, The LaRoucheInitiative," Grad¬ uate School of Public Policy Working Paper #119, University of California, Berkeley, August 1986. -38- pgNbr=42 26 Using the best available technology for HTLV-III antibody tests, approximately 1% of the positive results are false posi¬ tives, which is to say that the person who tests positive does not actually have HTLV-III antibodies. Because the percentage of false positives is larger when thetest is administered on a large-scale basis to the general population, a much larger percentage of false positive test results would be expectedif all school children were tested. 27 Statement made at theCalifornia Department of Health Services AIDS Task Force Meeting, August 13, 1986. 28 Personal communication, August 19, 1986. -39- pgNbr=43 APPENDIX A PROPOSITION 64 BALLOT PAMPHLET ARGUMENTS pgNbr=44 AcquiredImmuneDeficiencySyndrome (AIDS). 641 InitiativeStatute ArgumentsinFavorof Proposition64 Proposition64extends existingpublichealthcodesfor Themedicalfactsareclear.Thelawisclear.Common communicablediseasestoAIDS andAIDSviruscarriers. sense agrees. You andyourfamilyhave theright to be Thismeansthatthesame publichealthcodesthat already protectedfromallcontagiousdiseases,includingAIDS— protectyouandyourfamilyfromother thedeadliestofthemall.If dangerousdiseases youagree,voteYESonPropo¬ willalso protectyoufromAIDS. sition64. Proposition64willkeep AIDSoutofour schools,outofcommericalfoodestablish¬ KHUSHROGHANDHI ments,andwill givehealthofficialsthe powertotestand California Director,NationalDemocraticPolicyCommittee quarantinewhereneeded.Thesemeasuresarenot new; (NDFC),andMember-elect,Los AngelesCounty Democratic theyarethesamehealthmeasures PartyCentralCommittee applied,bylaw,every day,toeveryotherdangerous JOHN contagiousdisease. GRAUERHOLZ,M.D.,FCAP (Fellow,CollegeofAmericanPathologists) TodayAIDSisoutofcontrol.Thereareatleast 300,000 AIDS carriersin California,andthenumberofcasesofthis Californialaw highlycontagiousdiseaseis doublingevery6to12months. today makesitillegalforpublichealth Thenumberof authorities to be informed of a "unexplained"AIDS cases—casesnotin large number of those "high-risk"groups,such ashomosexualsandintravenous (about385,000) whocanspreadthedeadlyAIDSvirusto others.Howcan drugusers—continuestogrowat theytakethenecessarystepstoslowits alarmingrates.Indeed, the majorityofcasesworldwidefallintonoidentifiable spread aslong asthis istrue? "risk Under group"whatsoever.TheAIDSvirushasbeenfound existinglaw,aphysicianwhoencountersanyof 58 livinginmanybodilyfluids,includingblood,saliva, reportablediseasesisrequiredtoreporttohealthoffi¬ respi¬ cials.Includedareseveralvenereal diseases,suchas ratoryfluids,sweat,andtears,anditcansurvive syphi¬ upwards ofseven lisand daysoutsidethebody.There gonorrhea.Contacttracing isconducted.But,for presentlyexistno cureforthesick thosewiththeAIDS andnovaccinationforthe virus,notyetdevelopedintoAIDS, healthy.Itis 100%lethal. a specialstatelawpassedattherequestofthemalehomo¬ sexual AIDSisthe gravestpublichealththreatournationhas lobbyprohibitscontacttracing.Proposition64will ever faced. The requirethatthosewiththeAIDSvirusbereportedasare existing lawofCaliforniaclearly states othercommunicablediseases.Itdoesnot thatcertain requirequaran¬ provenpublichealthmeasuresmustbetaken tine. to protectthe publicfromanycommunicabledisease,and ThecostoftheAIDS no competent medical epidemicinCalifornia,it is es¬ professional denies thatAIDS is "communicable." timated,willbeatleast59,400lives by1991andalmost$6 Despitethesefacts,politiciansandspe¬ billion to be cialinterest paid by insuranceand/or taxpayers. Let's groupshavecircumventedthepublichealth reducethosestatistics laws.Forthefirsttimeinour byvotingYESonProposition64. history, adeadlydiseaseis being treated as a"civilrights" issue,rather than as a WILLIAME.DANNEMEYER Memberof publichealthissue. Congress,39thDistrict Rebuttalto ArgumentsinFavorofProposition64 Would youlet astrangerwithnomedicaltrainingor restaurant,grocerystore,orinthe workplace.Thinkfora medical moment.IfitweretruethatAIDSis backgrounddiagnoseadiseaseorillnessthatyou casuallytransmitted, have? Would youletapoliticalextremistdictatemedical clearlymanymoremen,womenandchildrenwouldbeill. Thisis policy?OFCOURSENOT. justnotthefact. The followersof Thefollowersof Lyndon LaRouche suggest that the LyndonLaRoucheareatit again!Using hands ofthemedical communityhavebeentied.THISIS partialtruthsandfalsehoods,theyareattemptingtocre¬ NOT TRUE!In ate fact, theCalifornia MedicalAssociation, panicinCalifornia. SayNO toPANIC. VoteNOon the CaliforniaNurses Association,theCalifornia Hospital Proposition 64. Association and other health professionals believe that HELEN MIRAMONTES,R.N.,M.S.,CCRN Proposition 64wouldseriouslyhurttheir abilitytotreat President,CaliforniaNursesAssociation and find acureforAIDS.Thesehealth professionalsare C.DUANEDAUNER seriouslyconcernedthatyearsofresearchwillbeunder¬ President,CaliforniaHospitalAssociation mined byfeargeneratedbythisirrational proposition. GLADDENV. ELLIOTT,M.D. NOONEhascontractedAIDSfromcasualcontactata President,CaliforniaMedicalAssociation 50 opinionsoftheauthorsandhavenotbeencheckedfor accuracyby .anyofRcialagency G86 pgNbr=45 AcquiredImmune DeficiencySyndrome (AIDS). InitiativeStatute ArgumentAgainstProposition64 Proposition64mustbedefeatedforthe billiofisofdollarsto safetyandpub¬ quarantineandisolateAIDScarriers lichealthofallCalifornians.Itisanirrational, andcould inappropri¬ requirepublichealthofficialstodoso.Quaran¬ ate and misguided approach to a serious tinewouldservenomedical publichedth purposebecausethereareno documented casesofAIDSever problem.Theproponentsofthismeasurearefollowersof beingtransmitted by • extremistLyndonLaRouche.Theywanttocreatean at¬ casualcontact. Californiansfromallwalksoflifeknow mosphereoffear, misunderstanding,inadequatehealth theymustunite careandpanic. Infact,theacronymoftheir toendthisdreadful campaign epidemic.Californianscanbeproud committeeisPANIC. that doctors and publichealth officials have actedin a Publichealthdecisionsmustbeleftinthehandsofthe professional,rationalandresponsiblemannertoprotect medical thehealthofCaliforniansandhavetakenall professionandpublichealthofficialsorwewill appropriate endangerthelivesofCalifornians.TheCaliforniaMedical precautionsastheyareneeded.Thiskindofinitiativecan Associationand countypublichealthofficialsrecognize onlydivide,create panicandforcethousandsnottoget the testedortreatedbecauseoffear. dangerofallowingpoliticalextremiststodictatestate publichealthandmedicalpolicy. Joinus,theLosAngelesTimes,TheLosAngelesHerald This typeofrepressiveanddiscriminatoryactionforced Examiner,SanFranciscoExaminer,theCaliforniaMedi¬ cal UponCaUfomiansbyfollowersofLyndonLaRouchewill Association,andmanyothersinopposingtheextremes offollowersof notservetolimittheproblem,butrathercould prolong LyndonLaRouche.VoteNOonProposition the 64! spreadofthisterribledisease.Thefearofquarantine orother discriminatorymeasures,including lossofjobs, GLADDENV. ELLIOTT,M.D. will make peoplereluctant to be tested. Fearing social President,CaliforniaMedicalAssociation isolation,individualsatriskwillavoidearlymedicalinter¬ EDZSCHAU vention,oreveninfection testing,drivingAIDSunder¬ Memberof Congress,12thDistrict ground. ALAN CRANSTON Enforcementofthismeasurecouldcostthe UnitedStatesSenator taxpayers Rebuttalto Argument AgainstProposition64 not.The OpponentsofProposition64havespentagreatdealof majorityofcaseshaveneverbeenstudied. • rhetoric,whileavoidingmedicalissues. Many health officials are demandingpublic health Thefacts: measures. Dr. Kizer,California's tophealthofficial, has • Healthofficials'failureto calledformore implementexistingpublic reportingandtestingpowers. health • lawshasresultedin TheAIDSvirus existsin nearly500,000peopleinfected many bodilyeffluentsand in survivesoutsidethe California,eachcapableofinfectingothers. body. • AIDSisthemost rapidlyspreadinglethaldiseasein Proposition64implementstheexistinghealthlaws;laws the country. scientificallydesignedtoprotectyourhealth;lawswhich • Of havebeenruled those constitutional infected,between40%and99%willproba¬ bycourtsfordecades. Don't blydie—between200,000and500,000deathsinCalifornia gamblewithhumanlife.VoteYESonProposition —and 64. AIDSis doublingeveryyear. • Thevast majorityofAIDScasesworldwidelieoutside GUS S.SERMOS "highrisk"groups.Thevictimsarenothomosexuals,and FormerCentersforDiseaseControlPublicHealthAdviser are withAIDS notintravenous drugusers.InHaiti,threeyearsago, PrograminFlorida 70% ofAIDScaseswerein "highrisk"groups.Today,over NANCYT. MULLAN,M.D. 70% Burbank arenotin "highrisk" groups. Could this happen here? Itcanandit will,unlesswestopit. JOHNGRAUERHOLZ,M.D.,FCAP • Doweknowwith certaintyhowAIDSspreads?Wedo (Fellow,CollegeofAmericanPathologists) ^^86 Argumentsprintedonthispagearetheopinionsoftheauthorsandhavenotbeencheckedforaccuracybyanyofficialagency 51 pgNbr=46 APPENDIX B LIST OF MANDATORILY REPORTABLE DISEASES IN CALIFORNIA pgNbr=47 DISEASES CURRENTLY REPORTABLE SECTION 2500 CALIFORNIA AEMINISTRATIVE CODE AIDS^ ♦Measles (Rubeola) Amebiasis ."Meningitis,Viral ^Anthrax MeningococcalInfections *Botulism(All Forms) Mu]i^}S Brucellosis Paratyphoid FeverA, B, and C Chancroid Pertussis *Cholera ♦Plague Coccidioidomycosis ♦Poliomyelitis, Paralytic Psittacosis Conjunctivitis, Acute Infectious of the Newborn Q Fever Dengue ♦Rabies, HumanorAnimal Diarrheaof the Newborn ♦Relapsing Fever *Diphtheria Reye Syndrome^ Disorders Characterized Rheumatic by Fever, Acute Lapsesof Consciousness RockyMountain Spotted Fever SalmonellaInfections Dysentery, Bacillary Scarlet Fever Encephalitis, Viral *Food Poisoning, Other thanBotulism ShigellaInfections GermanMeasles (Rubella) ♦Smallpox (Variola) Gonococcal Infections StreptococcalInfections Granuloma Inguinale Syphilis Tetanus ♦Hepatitis A Trachoma Hepatitis B Trichinosis Hepatitis Non-A, Non-B Tuberculosis HepatitisUnspecified Tularemia Leprosy Leptospirosis T3T>^id Fever Cases andCarriers Listeriosis^ ♦Typhus Fever Viral Exanthemin Lymphogranuloma Venereum Pregnant Women Malaria ♦Yellow Fever Note: Those diseases markedvhth an asterisk should be reported immediately; for food poisoningreport immediately onlyif food maystill be availablefor others to consume; forhepatitis A report imnediately onlj'if disease occursin foodhandlers. V.ade reportable under Section 2503 CAC, March 1983. ^ade reportable underSection 2503 CAC and by laboratories, Section 2505July 1985. 3 Made reportable by amendment of Health & Safety CodeJuly 1984. A SUSPECTED OUTBREAK OF ANY DISEASE SHOUIJ) BE REPORTED IMMEDIATELY!! July 1, 1986 pgNbr=48 APPENDIX C TEXT OF STATUTES AND REGULATIONS RELEVANT TO PROPOSITION 64 pgNbr=49 APPENDIX C TEXT OF STATUTES AND REGULATIONS RELEVANT TO PROPOSITION 64 Listof Contents Laws Specifically Referred to by Proposition 64 • Health and Safety Code (H&S) §195. • Health and Safety Code §3123. List of Reportable Diseases; Establishment by Department; Rules Requiring Quarantine; Quarantine by HealthOfficer • Administrative CodeTitle 17, Part 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 1 Reportable Diseases and Conditions Laws Potentially Relevant to Proposition 64 • H&S §3110. Duty of Health Officers to Prevent Spread of Disease • H&S §3111. Enforcementof Orders, Rules and Regulations • H&S §3112. Places of Quarantine; Establishment and Maintenance m H&S §3114. Quarantine andDisinfection of Persons and Property; Destruction of Property; Compensation • H&S §3115. Quarantine or Isolation; Cases of Communicable Disease • H&S §3116. Compliancewith Quarantine • H&S §3117. Leaving Quarantined Premises • H&S §3118. Exclusionof Persons from School • H&S §3119. Raisingof Quarantine; Treatment or Destructionof Property; Disinfection of Persons • H&S §3121. Report of Local Epidemic; Contents • H&S §3125. Duty to Report Diseases to Health Officer pgNbr=50 § 3123. List of reportable diseases; establishment by depart¬ ment; rules requiring quarantine; quarantine by healthofficer The state departmentmayestablish alistofreportablediseases and this list may be changed at any time by the state department. Those diseases listed as reportable shall beproperlyreported as re¬ quiredtothestatedepartmentbythehealthofficer. The state departmentmayfromtimetotimeadoptandenforce rulesand regulationsrequiringisolation (strictormodified) orquar¬ antine for any of the contagious, infectious, or communicable dis¬ easesif in the opinionofthestatedepartment such action is neces¬ saryfortheprotectionofthepublichealth. Thehealthofficer mayrequireisolation (strictormodified) or quarantinefor any case of contagious, infectious, or communicable diseeisewhen suchactionis necessaryfortheprotectionofthepublic health. (AddedbyStata.1957,c.205,p. 864, §20.) pgNbr=51 SUBCHAPTER 1. REPORTABLEDISEASESANDCONDITIONS Article 1 Reporting 2. GeneralInstructiom 3. Specific DiseasesandConditions DETAILEDANALYSIS Article 1. Reporting Secbon 2500. ReportingtoLocalHealthAuthority 2501. Repiorts by Local Health Officer to State Department of Public Health 2502 ReportingofOutbreaks 2503. OccurrenceofUnusualDiseases 2504. ReprortbyIndividual 2505. Nobficabon byLaboratories 2508. ReportingbySchools 2509 RecordsofLocalHealthOfficer 2511. Determinabonof MorbidityLevel Article 2 GeneralInstructions Section 2512 Investigationofthe Case 2514 InstrucbonstoHousehold 2515 DefinibonofIsolabon 2516 Strict Isolation 2518 ModifiedIsolabon 2520 Quaranhne 2522 Observabon 2524 TerminalDisinfecbon 2526 ElxclusionandReadmission bySchoolAuthoribes 2528 Contamination by PathogenicOrganismsofMilk,MilkProductsor Products ResemblingMilkProducts PublicFoodHandlers 2530 2534 LaboratoryTestsforReleaseofCasesorCarriersofCommunicable Diseases 2536 TransportabonofCommunicableDiseaseCases 2538 Funerals 2540 GeneralClause Article 3. SpecificDiseasesandCondibons Secbon 2550 Amebiasis 2551 Anthrax Botulism 2552 2553 Brucellosis 2554 Chancroid 2556 Cholera 2558 Coccidioidomycosis 2560 Conjuncbvibs,AcuteInfectiousoftheNewborn 2562 Dengue DiarrheaoftheNewborn 2564 2566 Diphtheria 2570 Elncephalibs,Acute 2572 DisordersCharacterizedbyLackofConsciousness Food 2574 Poisoning 2575. German Measles (Rubella) 2577. GonococcusInfecbon 2578 Granuloma Inguinale 2579 Hepabbs,Infecbous 2581 Hepabhs.Serum 2582. Leprosy (Hansen'sDisease) 2584 Leptospirosis (IncludingWeil'sDisease) 2585 LymphogranulomaVenereum 2586 Malaria 2588 Measles 2590 Meningibs, MeningococcalorMeningococcemia 2592 Mumps 2593 Neoplasm,Cancer pgNbr=52 Section 25&4 Pertussis (WhoopingCough) 2595 PhysicallyHandicappedChildren 2596 Plague Case and Suspect Cases to be Reported by Telephone or Telegraph 2597 QFever 2600 Poliomyelitis,AcuteAnterior 2602 Psittacosis 2603 ControlofPet Birds 2604 Rabies,Human 2606 Rabies.Animal 26062 RabiesQuarantine 26064 OfficiallyDeclaredRabiesAreas 2606.6 ImpiortationofDogs 26068 Skunk Rabies 2608 RelapsingFever 2610 Rheumatic Fever,Acute 2611 Rock) MountainSpottedFever 2612 SalmonellaInfections (otherthanTyphoidFever) 2612 1 TurtleSalmonellosis 2613 ShigellaInfections (Dysentery,Bacillaiy) 2614 Smallpiox 2616 StreptococcalInfections,Hemolytic 2617 Syphilis 2618 Tetanus 2620 Trachoma 2622 Trichinosis 2624 Tuberculosis 2626 Tularemia 2628 TyphoidFever 2630 TyphusFever (Flea-bome.EpidemicType) 2632 TyphusFever (Louse-bome,EpidemicType) 2636 \'enereal Diseases 2640 YellowFever pgNbr=53 SUBCHAPTER 1 REPORTABLEDISEASES ANDCONDITIONS Article 1. Reporting 2500. ReportingtotheLocalHealthAuthority. Itshall bethe duty of everyphysician,practitioner,dentist,coroner,every superintendentor manageroia dispensary,hospital,clinic,or anyotherperson knowingoforinattendanceonacaseor suspectedcaseof anyofthefollowing diseasesor conditions,to notifythelocalhealthauthority immediately.Astandi ard typereportform hasbeen adoptedand isavailableforthis purjxjse. Amebiasis Meningitis.Meningoccx-calor Anthrax Meningococcemia Botulism •Mumps Brucellosis (Undulant Fever) ParatyphoidFever,A, BandC (See Chancroid Salmonellainfections) Cholera Pertussis (WhcxjpingCough) Coccidioidomycosis Plague Conjunctivitis.AcuteInfectiousofthe Poliomyelitis.AcuteAnterior Newborn Psittacosis (Gonorrheal Ophthalmia, Ophthalmia Q Fexer Neonatorum) Rabies,Human orAnimal Dengue RelapsingFever DiarrheaoftheNewborn Rheumatic Fever,Acute Diphtheria Rock) MountainSpiottedFever SalmonellaInfections (exclusiveof Dysenterx, Bacillars (See Ty¬ Shigella infections) phoidFever) •Scarlet Fever Encephalitis.Acute Epilepsv ShigellaInfections •Food Poisoning (other thanBotulism) Smallpox (Variola) German Measles (Rubella) •StreptococcalInfections,Hemolytic GonococcusInfection (includingScarlet Fever,and Strep¬ Granuloma tococcal^reThroat i Inguinale Hepatitis,Infectious Syphilis Tetanus Hepiatitis,Serum Trachoma Lepross (Hansen'sDisea.sei Trichinosis Leptospirosis (includingU'eil'sDisease) Tuberculosis LsmphogranulomaVenereum Tularemia (Lymphogranuloma Inguinale. Malaria TyphoidFever.CasesandCarriers •Measles (Rubeola^ TyphusFever Viral Exanthemin PregnantWomen Yellow Fever For outbreak reporting and reporting ofoccurrence ofunusual and rare diseases seeSections 2502 and 2503. .NOTE .^uthorit) citedforSubchapter 1 (§§2500to 2640,inclusivei: Sections 102. 206, 2571.and 21100.Healthand Safety Code AdditionalAuthorits cited Sections3110-3125. Health and Safety Code Reference:Section555(bi.Businessand ProfessionsCode HISTORY 1 Originally published 8-15-1945 (Title 17) 2 .Amendmentfiled 12-22-69;effectivethirtieth day thereafter (Register69.No.52) For priorhistory, see Register 66,No.39. 3 .Amendmentfiled 12-14-79,effectivethirtieth day thereafter (Register 79,,\o 50i 2501. ReportsbyLocalHealthOfficertoState DepartmentofPublicHealth. (a) Indixidual Case Reports. Each localhealthofficer shallreport at least weekly, on theprescribeaform,totheDirectorofthe StateDepartmentof PublicHealtheachindividual caseofthosediseasesorcondibonsnotmarked withanasterisk (*)intheabovelist (Section 2500)whichhavebeen reported tohiminthelast seven davs. pgNbr=54 (b) Summan Reports; Fordiseasesmarkedwithanasterisk (food poison¬ ing, measles, mumps, scarlet fever and streptococcal infections), the local healthofficershall prepareandsendtotheState DepartmentofPublicHealth onceeachweeka repwrtonaprescribedformshowingthenumberofcasesof eachsuchdiseasethathaveb^n reportedtohimduringthepastsevendays, (c) Immediate ReportsbyTelephoneorTeleCTaph; Cwesandsuspectcases of cholera,botulism,dengue,plague,relapsingfever (louse-borne), smallpox, typhus (louse-bomeepidemictype),andyellowfever,aretobereporteaby tnelocalhealthofficertotheDirectoroftheState DepartmentofPublicHealth immediately by telephone or telegraph (See Sec. 2569, Health and Safets Code.) HISTORY 1. Amendmentfiled S-24-55;effectivethirtiethdaythereafter (Register55.No.8) 2502. Rep>ortingofOutbreaks. Anypersonhavingknowledgeofan>outbreakorundueprevalenceofinfec¬ tiousor parasiticdiseaseorinfestationwhetherornotlistedinSection 2500, shall promptlyreportthefactstothelocalhealthofficer,whoshallinvestigate thecircumstancesandifhefindsthat an epidemicorundueprevalencedoes infact exist,heshall reporttheoutbreaktotheDirectoroftheState Depart¬ mentofPublicHealth. "Hie following areexamplesofdiseases,outbreaksof whicharetobe so reported: Epidemicgastroenteritis (otherthan Infectiousmononucleosis food ficisonmgi Influenza,epidemic Epidemickeratoconjunctivitis Lymphocyticchoriomeningitis Feversofunknown etiolog> Pneumonia,infectious German measles Ringworm Impetigo HISTORY; 1 Amendmentfiled 5-24-55,effectivethirtieth da> thereafter (Register55,No.8i. 2503. OccurrenceofUnusual Diseases. Any personhaxingknowledgeofa caseofanunusualdiseasenotlistedin Section2500shall promptlyconveythefactstothelocalhealthofficer.Elxam- ples are: glanders,herpangina,histoplasmosis,toxoplasmosis, echinococcosis, listeriosis,catscratch fever,andrickettsialjxix HISTORY 1. Newsectionfiled 5-24-55.effectivethirtieth daythereafter (Register55,N0.81. 2516. StrictIsolation. Ifthe disease is one requiringstrict iso¬ lation, thehealth officershall insurethatinstructions are given to the patientand membersofthe household, definingthe areawithin which the patientistobeisolatedand statingthemeasurestobetaken topre¬ ventthe spreadofthedisease. Strictisolationshallincludethe followingmeasures: (a; The patient shall have a separate bed in a room protected againstflies. (b) .Ml persons,exceptthosecaringforthe patient,shallbeexcluded fromthesickroom. (c) The personscaringforthe patientshall avoid comingin con¬ tactwith anyotherpersonswithinthehouseholdor elsewhereuntil every precaution has been taken topreventthe spreadofinfectiousmaterial fromthe patient'sroom. (d) The personscaringforthe patientshallwear awashableouter garmentandshall thoroughlywashtheirhandswith soapandhotwater after handlingthepatientor anyobject hemayhavecontaminated. On leavingtheroominwhichthe patientisisolated,theattendantshaDtake offthewashableouter garmentand hangitintheroomuntildisinfected. (e) Alldischargesfromthenoseandmouthshallbeburnedor dis¬ infected. The discharges should be received in piecesofsoft tissue or clothand droppedintoa paperbagwhichcan beburned. pgNbr=55 (f) Objectswhichmayhavebeencontaminated bythepatientshall be thoroughlycleansedbeforebeingremovedfromthe contaminatedarea. (p) Thefecesandurineof patientssufferingfromdiseasesinwhich the infectious agentappearsin the fecesorurineshall be disposed of accordingtoinstructionsgivenbythelocalhealthofficer. 2518. ModifiedIsolation. Ifthe diseaseis one inwhich only a modified isolation is required,thelocalhealth officer shall issue appro¬ priate instructions, prescribing the isolation technique to be followed. The isolation techniquewill depend upon the disease. 2520. Quarantine. Quarantine is defined as the limitation of freedomofmovementof personsoranimalsthathave been exposedto a communicable disease for a period of time equal to the longest usual incubation periodofthedisease,in b\u1i manner asto preventeffective contactwitlithosenot so eximsecl.Ifthediseaseisone requiringquaran¬ tineofthecontactsin addition to isolationofthe case, the local health officershall determinethe contactswhoare subjecttoquarantine,specify the place to which they shall be quarantined, and issue instructions accordingly. He shall insure that provisions are made for the medical observation ofsuchcontactsas frequently asnecessaryduringthequar¬ antine period. 2522. Observation. For the purposes of definition, the term "observation," as used in these regulations, shall refer to a frequent check uponthepersonunderobservationtodetermine whethersuch per¬ sonisfreeof thediseaseforwhichhe hasbeen placedunderobservation, or hascontractedthe disease.L'nlessotherwise specified,it doesnotmean theisolation or quarantineoftheindividual. 2524. Terminal Disinfection. Each personreleasedfrom quaran¬ tineor isolationshall batheand wash his hairwith soap and hot water and putoncleanclothes.Theareaofisolationshall bedisinfectedaccord¬ ingtotheinstructionsofthelocalhealthofficer. 2526. ExclusionandReadmission bySchoolAuthorities. Itshall be the duty of the principal or other person in charge of any public, privateor SundaySchooltoexcludetherefrom anychildorother person affectedwith a disease presumablycommunicable,untilthe expirationof the prescribed periodofisolationforthe particularcommunicabledisease. Ifthe attending physician,schoolphysician,orhealth officerfinds upon examination thatthe personisnotsufferingfromacommunicabledisease, he maysubmitacertificatetothiseffecttotheschool authoritywhoshall readmitthe person. 2528. Contamination by Pathogenic Organisms of Blilk, Milk Products or Products Resembling Milk Products, (a^ The State BoardofPublic Health findsthat the presenceof anyofthe following pathogenic organisms in milk, milk product, or product resembling milk products make such pniduct unsafe for human consumption: Mycobacterium tuberculosis: Brucella spp ; Streptococcus pyogenes, group A hemolytic: Corynebacterium dipbtheriae; Salmcinella para¬ typhi; Salmonella schottmuelleri; Salmonella hirsehfeldi; Salmonella typhi; Salmonella dublin; Salmonella typhimurium; Shigella spp. "l^enever ahealth officerfindsthat milk,milk product,orproduct re¬ sembling milk products, is unscfe for humaii consumption becauseit contains any of the above named organisms, he shall issue a written ordertothe producerordistributorofthe product (1 "i summarizingthe laboratory findings, and (2) prohibiting the sale or disposal of such milk,milk product, or product resemblingmilk products, except by a method approved by him. until such timo as ho finds the product or products to be safe for human consumption. pgNbr=56 (b <'i liPaltb nffid-r bn? pviJ-'iK-i- ibat luilk, milk prod¬ uct. cir product rp>-emblint: milk prc>du^-t^ has caus.^d human illness or containstoxins •which make such product unsafefor human consump¬ tion. he may issue a ■written order to the producer or distributor of the product(]) statinpthefactsuponwhichhisconclusionsarebased, and (2) prohibitinpthe use. sale, or disposal of suchmilk,milk prod¬ uct.or product rescmblinpmilkprc^ducts.exceptby amethodapproved byhim.untilsuchtime ashefindsittobesafeforhumanconsumption. (c) The health officer shall immediately forward a copy of any order issued pursuant to this section to the State Director of Public Health. (d) Anyproducerordistributorofmilk,milkproduct,orproduct resemblinpmilk products, subject to an order of a health officer pur¬ suanttothis section may appeal to the State Boardof Public Health solelyuponthequestionofwhethersuchproductsare,infact,safefor human consumption. Such appeal shall be made in ■writing, stating whichofthefactssetforthintheorderareadmittedanddenied.Upon receiptofthe■writtenappeal,theStateDirectorofPublicHealth,after such investigationofthematter as he deems necessary, may amendor rescindtheorder,or setthematterforhearingbefore ahearingofficer designated byhim.Inthe event theorderisnot rescindedoramended tothesatisfactionofthe appellant,themattershall be setforhearing. The hearing shall,if possible, be set"within 14 daysfrom the dateof receipt of the aptieal. unlessadditionaltime isrequired by the appel¬ lant. Insofar as is practicable, the procedures of the Administrative ProcedureAct (Ch. 5.Pt. 1,Div. 3.Title 2,ofthe Government Code) shall api>ly.Tli-hearingofficershall submit a proposed decisiontothe Board of Public Health which shall is=ue its decision in ac¬ cordancewith Section 11517oftheAdministrative ProcedureAct.The decision shall be subject tojudicial review. (e"i The proceduresofthissectionauthorize ahealth officertotake immediateactionto protectthepublichealthintheevent hefindsthat milk, milk products, or products resemblingmilk products constitutes animmediatethreattothe publichealth.Nothinghereinshallpreclude the applicability of other provisions of law pertaining to the regula¬ tion of such products, includingbut not limited to, the provisions of the Agricultural CodeandtheCaliforniaPureFoodsAct (Ch. 3,Div. 21.Health and Safety Code). Jvote: Authcirify cited: SectiocF 102 and 20S. Health and Safety Code. Ref- e.'ence : Sections 311(»-312.o. Health and Safety Code. Eitlorp: 1. Repealer and new section filed 12-22-69; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register69,No.52). 2530. PublicFood Handlers. No person known to be infected with acommunicablediseaseor suspectedofbeinginfectedwith a com¬ municablediseaseshall engageinthecommercialhandlingoffood,orbe employedon adairy-oronpremiseshandlingmilkormilkproducts,until heisdetermined bythehealthofficertobefreeofsuchdisease,orincapable of transmittingtheinfection. (SeeChapter 7,Article 1, Section 28295, Health and Safety Code.) 2534. Laboratory Testsforthe Eelease of Cases or Carriersof Communicable Diseases. "Whenever laboratorytestsarerequiredfor thereleaseofcasesorcarriers,thetestsshallbetaken bythehealth offi¬ cerorhis representativesandshallbesubmittedtoapublichealthlabora¬ tory approvedbytheStateBoardofPublicHealth. Specimensmaybe sentto laboratoriesnotso approved, providedthespecimensaredivided anda portionofthe specimensaresenttoan approvedlaboratory.Release shall beconsideredonthebasisofthe reportoftheapprovedlaboratory only. pgNbr=57 2536. TranfiportationofConununicable Disease Cases. No per¬ sonwith acomniunicabledisease subjecttoisolationnoranycontactsub¬ jectto quarantineshalltravelorbetransportedfromoneplacetoanother within thelocalhealth jurisdiction,witlioutthe permissionofthelocal health officer,and nosuch person shalltravelor be transportedoutside theareaof jurisdiction ofthehealth officeruntilthe permissionofthe health officer into whose jurisdiction the patient is to be broupht is obtained. An esception may be made in instances where the patient isto be admitted directly to a hospitalforthetreatment of the com¬ municable disease, provided that the health officer from whose juris¬ diction the case is to be transported shall insure that adequate precautions are taken to prevent dissemination of the disease by the patientor his contacts en route to the hospital. Eitiory: 1. AmendmeDt filed 5-24-55; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Reg¬ ister 55, No. 8), 2538, Funerals. Funeralservicesforindividualswhohavedied ofacommunicablediseaseshallbeconductedin accordancewithinstruc¬ tionsofthe healthofficer.Indiseases requiring quarantineofcontacts, a publicfuneralservicemaybepermittedonlyifthecasketremainsclosed andthosecontacts subjecttoquarantinewhoattendthefuneralare ade¬ quatelysegregatedfromthepublic. 2540. GeneralClause. Inadditiontothe requirementsstipulated in these regulations,thelocalhealthofficershall,aftersuitable investiga¬ tion, take such additional steps as he deems necessary to prevent the spread of communicable disease or a disease suspected of being com¬ municableinorderto protectthepublichealth. Article 3. SpecificDiseasesandConditions NOTE: Sections 2550. - 2670. contain specific instructions for the diseases and conditions named at the beginning of this Appendix. pgNbr=58 § 3110. Dutyofhealthofficersto prevent spreadof Each health officer knowingorhavingreasontobelievethatanv case ofthe diseases made reportable by regulation of the State De¬ partment of Health Services, or any other contagious, infectious or communicable disease exists, or has recentlyexisted,within the ter¬ ritory under his jurisdiction, shall take such measures as may be necessarytopreventthe spreadofthediseaseor occurrenceofaddi¬ tional cases. (Added by Stats.1957, c. 205, p. 853, § 20. Amended by Stats.1971, c. 1593, p. 3276, § 172, operative July 1, 1973; Stats.1977, c. 1252, § 270, operative July 1, 1978.) § 3111. Enforcementof orders,rulesand regulations Eachhealthofficer shallenforceall orders,rules,andregulations concerning quarantineorisolation prescribedordirectedbythestate department. (Added by Stats.1957,c.205, p.853. §20.) § 3112. Placesofquarantine: establishment andmaintenance Each healthofficer,wheneverrequiredbythestatedepartment, shallestablishandmairitain placesofquarantineorisolationthatshall be subjecttothespiecialdirectionsofthestatedepartment. I Added byStats.1957. c.205,p.853, §20.) § 3114. Quarantine and disinfection of persons and property; destructionof property; compensation Whenever in the judgment of the statedepartmentit is neces¬ sary for the protection or preservation of the public health, each healthofficer shall,whendirected bythestatedepartment,dothefol¬ lowing: (a) Quarantine orisolate anddisinfect persons, animals, houses or rooms,in accordancewithgeneral and specificinstructionsofthe state department. (b) Destroy bedding, carpets, household goods,furnishings, ma¬ terials, clothing,oranimals, whenordinarymeansofdisinfection are considered unsafe, and when the property is, inthejudgment ofthe state department,animmunentmenacetothe publichealth. Whenthe propertyisdestroyed pursuanttothissection,thegov¬ erningbodyofthe localityinwhichthedestructionoccursmaymake adequateprovisionforcompensationinpropercasesforthoseinjured thereby. (Added byStats.1957, c.205,p.853, ^20,) pgNbr=59 § 3115. Quarantineorisolation; casesof eominunirable disease Upon receivinginformationofthe existenceof contagious, infec¬ tious, or communicable diseasefor which thestate department may fromtime totimedeclarethe needfor strict isolationor quarantine, each healthofficershall: (a) Insure the adequate isolation of each case, and appropriate quarantineofthe contactsand premises. (b) Follow local rules and regulations, andall general and spe¬ cial rules, regulations, andordersof thestate department,in carrying out the quarantineor isolation. (Added byStats.1957, c. 205, p.853, §20.) § 3116. Compliancewith quarantine When quarantine or isolation, either strict or modified, is es¬ tablished by a health officer, all personsshall obey hisrules, orders, and regulations. (Added by Stats.1957, c. 205, p. 854, § 20. Amended by Stats.1970, c. 67,p. 82, § 1.) § 3117. Leaving quarantinedpremises A person subjectto quarantineorstrict isolation, residingorin a quarantined building, house, structure, orother shelter, shall not go beyond the lot upon which the building, house, structure, or other shelter is situated,norputhimselfinimmediate communication with any person not subject to quarantine, other than the physician, the healthofficer or personsauthorized bythehealthofficer. (Added by Stats.1957,c. 205,p.854, §20.) § 3118. Exclusionof personsfromschool No instructor, teacher, pupil, or child who resides where any contagious, infectious,orcommunicablediseaseexistsor hasrecenth" exist^,which is subject tostrict isolationor quarantineof contacts, shall be permitted byany superintendent, principal,orteacherof any college, seminary, or public or private school to attend the college, seminary, or school, except by thewritten permission of the health officer. (Addedby Stats.1957,c.205, p.854, §20.) pgNbr=60 § 3119. Raisingofquarantine; treatmentordestructionof prop¬ erty; disinfectionof persons No quarantineshall beraiseduntil ever>'exposedroom,together with all personalpropertyin the room, has been adequatelytreated, or,if necessary, destroyed,underthedirectionofthehealthofficer; anduntilall persons havingbeenunderstrictisolationareconsidered noninfectious. (Added by Stats.1957,c.205, p.854, §20.) § 3121. Reportoflocal epidemic; contents In the caseof a local epidemicof disease,thehealthofficershall report at such times as are requested by the state department all facts concerning the disease, and the measures taken to abate and preventitsspread. ( Added byStats.1957,c.205, p.854, §20.; § 3125. Dutyto reportdiseasestohealthofficer All physicians, nurses, clergymen, attendants, owners, proprie¬ tors, managers, employees,andjjersons living,or visitinganysick per¬ son, in any hotel, lodginghouse, house, building, office, structure, or other place where any person isill of any infectious, contagious,or communicable disease, shall promptly report that fact to the health officer, together with the name of the person,if known, the place whereheis confined,andthenatureofthe disease,ifknown. (Added byStats.1957, c.205, p.855, §2u.) pgNbr=61 APPENDIX D LEGISLATIVE ANALYST'S ESTIMATE OF PROPOSITION 64'S FISCAL IMPACT pgNbr=62 L69 ^ 10t "iV6 ni"io Iyst Final Version July 21,. 1986 ACQUIRED IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (AIDS) INITIATIVE (PROPOSITION 64) Background Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a disease that impairs the body's normal ability to resist harmful diseases and infections. The disease is caused by a virus that is spread through intimate sexual contact or exposure to the blood of an infected person. As of the preparation of this analysis, there was no readily available method to detect whether a person actually has the AIDS virus. Atest does exist to detect whether a person has ever been infected with the AIDS virus and as a result has developed antibodies toit. A person infected with the AIDS virus may or may not develop the AIDS diseaseafter a period of several years. There is no known curefor AIDS, which is ultimatelyfatal. As of June 30, 1986, there were 5,188 cases of AIDS and 2,406 deaths from the disease in California. The State Department of Health Services estimates that up to 500,000 persons in California are infected with the AIDS virus, and that by 1990 therewill be approximately 30,000 cases of AIDS in the state. Existing Laws Covering Communicable Diseases. Local health officers have broad authority to take measures they believe are necessary to protect public health and prevent the spread of disease-causing organisms. However, this broad authority is limited to situations where there is a reasonablebelief that the individual affected has or may have the disease and poses a danger to the public. The kind of measure taken by health officers varies, depending on how easily an organism is spread from one person to another. For example, to prevent the spread of a disease, local pgNbr=63 healthofficers may require Isolation of infected or diseased persons, and quarantine of exposed persons. In addition, persons infected with a disease-causing organism may be excluded from schools for the duration of the infection and excluded from food handling jobs. In some cases, these measures may be applied to persons suspected of having the infection or the disease. Current AIDS Reporting Requirements. Physicians and other health care providers are now required to report cases of certain listed communicable diseases to local healthofficers who, in turn, report the cases to the State Department of Health Services. At the time this analysis was prepared, AIDS was not on thelist of communicable diseases that must be reported to local healthofficers. However, AIDS is being reported under a regulation which requires an unusual disease, not listed as a communicable disease, to be reported by local health officers. Under other provisions of law, hospitals are required to report cases of AIDS to local health officers who, in turn, report the cases to the state Departmentof Health Services. Counties also report to the state the numberof cases in which blood tests performed at certainfacilities reveal the presence of antibodies to the AIDS virus, indicating that a person has been infectedwith the virus. Existing law does not allow the releaseof the names or other identifying informationfor persons who take the AIDS antibodytest. According to the State Department of Health Services, persons who have AIDS and persons who are capable of spreading the AIDS virus are subject to existing coiranunicable disease laws. However, no health officer -2- pgNbr=64 has ever taken anyofficial action to require persons infected with the AIDS virus to be isolated or quarantined, because there is no medical evidence which demonstrates that the AIDS virus is transmitted by casual . contactwith an infected person. In addition, no healthofficer has recotimended excluding persons with AIDS, or those who are capable of spreading AIDS, from schools orjobs. Proposal This measure declares that AIDS and the "condition of being a carrier" of the virus that causes AIDS are communicable diseases. The measure also requires the State Department af Health Services to add these conditions to thelist of diseases that must be reported. Because AIDS cases are already being reported, the measure would require the reporting of those who are "carriers of the AIDSvirus." Currently, no test to make this determination is readily available. The measure also states that the Department of Health Services and all health officers "shallfulfill all of the duties and obligations specified" under the applicable laws "in a manner consistent with the intent of this act." Although the meaning of this language could be subject to twodifferent interpretations,it most likely means that the laws and regulations which currently apply to other communicable diseases shall also apply to AIDS and the "condition of being a carrier" of the AIDS virus. Thus, health officers would continue to exercise theirdiscretion in taking actions necessary to control this disease. Based on existing medical knowledge and health department practices, few,if any, AIDS patients and carriers of the AIDS virus would be placed in isolation or -3- pgNbr=65 under quarantine. Similarly, few,if any, persons would be excluded from schools or food handling jobs. If, however, the language is interpreted as placing new requirements on health officers,it could result in new actions such as expanding testing programs for the AIDS virus, imposing isolation or quarantine of persons who have the disease, and excluding persons infectedwith the AIDS virus from schools and food handling positions. A Fiscal Effect The fiscal effect ofthis measure could vary greatly, depending on howit would be interpreted by state and local health officers and the courts. If existing discretionary communicable disease controls were applied to the AIDS disease, there would bejio substantial net change in state and local costs as a direct resultofthis measure. Thus, the primaryeffect ofthis measure woul'd be to require the reporting of persons who are carriers of the virus which causes AIDS. Very few cases would be reported because no test to confirm that a person carries the virus is readily available. If. such a test becomes widely available in the future, more cases would be reported. The fiscal impact could be very substantialif the measure were interpreted to require changes in AIDS control measures by state and local health officers, eithervoluntarily or as a result of a change in medical knowledge on how the disease is spread, or as a result of court decisions which mandate certain control measures. Ultimately, the fiscal impact would depend on the level of activity that state and local health officers might undertake with respect to: (1) identifying, isolating and quarantining persons infectedwith the virus, or having the disease, and -4- pgNbr=66 (2) excluding those persons from schools or food handling positions. The cost of implementing these actions could range from millions of dollars to hundreds ofmillions of dollars peryear. In summary, the net fiscal impact of this measure is unknown--and could vary greatly, depending on what actions are taken by health officers and the courts to Implement this measure. pgNbr=67 SenatePresidentPro Tempore DAVID ROBERTI J CONTACT: RELEASE DATE: KATHRYN DUKE (916) 4A5-1727 ROBERT FORSYTH SEP 24 1986 205 State No. 140 Capitol Sacramento, OA 95814 CPC RE<uSivtZD (916) 445-8390 GM btF 2 6 1986 ROBERTI ANNOUNCES SOR ANALYSIS ON AIDS INITIATIVE SACRAMENTO--Senate President pro Tempore David Roberti (D- Holl3rwood/Burbank) today (September 24) announced the release of a Senate Office of Research analysis of the AIDSInitiative (Proposition 64), whichwill be on the November statewide ballot. Said Roberti: "The subjects of AIDS and AIDS prevention are too important to beleft to those who promote fear instead of facts, confusion instead of clarity. This report presents the kind of information and analysis neededfor a real understanding of what Proposition 64 means and whatits impact could be on California." Noting that Proposition 64 is the creationof extremist L3mdon LaRouche, Roberti said, "LaRouche andhis appropriately-named 'PANIC organization are more interested in exploitingpublic fear about AIDS than in contributing to an effective AIDS prevention and treatment program inCalifornia." Among other findings, the SOR report concludes: "The drafters of the Initiative--whether by design or accident--have used ambiguous language whose meaning is open to a number of interpretations with widely different results. If the Initiative is voted into law, the public can expect intense and lengthy litigation over the many questions raised by each of the legal" [issues discussed in thereport]. # # # // STATE CAPITOL, ROOM 205 SACRAMENTO. CALIFORNIA 95814 (916) 445-8390 pgNbr=68 Additional copies of this publication may be purchased for $4.50 per copy from Joint Publications Box 90, State Capitol Sacramento, OA 95814 Please add 6 percentsalestax. Makechecks payable to STATE OFCALIFORNIA pgNbr=69